[Music]
what are you doing right now
if you're watching this video chances
are you'll be sitting down
somewhere and when you're sat down
you're stationary
right wrong well
sort of wrong while you may be
stationary on earth's surface
right now earth itself is moving
hurtling through space
at speeds of around 30 kilometers
per second
[Music]
similarly the sun is also moving at
speeds of around 220 kilometers per
second
dragging our entire solar system with it
as it orbits the galactic tide of the
milky way
[Music]
of course we don't feel either of these
movements
gravity keeps us bolted down for the
ride
but elsewhere in space and given enough
time
everything moves and everything flows
nothing remains stationary in space
but what is it that makes the galaxy
move
well that's going to be our topic today
and it makes for one of astronomy's most
intriguing mysteries
as you are watching this video
everything in our local universe for
millions of light years
including the milky way and the local
group is being dragged through space
pulled through the void towards a
gravitational focal point which we
cannot see
and whatever it is it exerts an
astonishing
almost godlike influence on the vast
swathes of space around it
it is the mystery of the great attractor
the milky way is a vast ancient and
structured collection
of hundreds of billions of stars known
as a galaxy
the universe is teeming with them many
larger and more densely packed with
stars than our own
and when this many stars come together
gravity allows them to work as a
coherent structure
with a much stronger gravitational
influence
galaxies are so incredibly massive that
they can attract one another from
millions of light years across space
sometimes getting close enough to
collide producing new larger galaxies
however the space between galaxies is
significantly more voluminous than the
galaxies themselves
and there is another force at work space
itself is expanding
including the space between galaxies
which pushes them apart
faster than they can attract one another
spreading the contents of the universe
more sparsely
this is known as the hubble flow
galaxies are for the most part
receding away from all other galaxies
uniformly as the universe grows
consequently most galaxies are not close
enough to collide with their neighbours
only very small localized pockets of
space like our local group
will be dense enough to collapse into a
single structure
however while they may not be destined
to collide
dense concentrations of galaxies can
still exert influences on one another
bringing them close enough that the
combined gravitational potential of the
galaxies
attracts more remote galaxies creating
denser concentrations and emptying out
the space in between in a
self-sustaining process
this forms the overarching structure
that stretches across our entire
universe
the cosmic web kind of like a sponge
there are areas of matter which branch
in every direction
and large empty swathes in between
the cosmic web is composed of enormous
walls of interacting galaxies
known as galaxy filaments and these can
contain hundreds of thousands of
galaxies
and span over billions of light years
the galaxies within these filaments
migrate through paths within the
structure
and streams of interacting galaxies flow
converge and diverge like great cosmic
water flows over distances difficult to
comprehend
the individual thread-like components of
a galaxy filament are known as galaxy
clusters and superclusters
smaller groupings of tens hundreds or
perhaps thousands of galaxies
which are more concentrated than the
overall density of the filament
and thus have more substantial
interactions with one another
in truth the lines between clusters
superclusters and filaments are slightly
fuzzy
primarily because we didn't realize that
galaxy structures of filament size could
exist when we coined
the other terms we knew galaxies could
cluster up
but we never thought that they would be
able to interact over billions of light
years
how wrong we were
over the past 40 years we have managed
to build up a comprehensive
three-dimensional map
of intergalactic space and we now know a
considerable amount about our
large-scale surroundings
not bad for a tiny world existing in the
blink of an eye on a galactic time scale
we know that our local group which
contains us andromeda the triangulum
galaxy
and more than 100 other small satellite
dwarf galaxies
is situated in a relatively outlying
region to a cluster of more than 1
300 galaxies known as the virgo cluster
this cluster happens to be the
gravitational core of a much larger
colony
containing over a hundred galaxy groups
like ours
called the virgo supercluster one of
more than an
estimated 10 million galaxy
superclusters in the observable universe
the virgo supercluster extends over an
area of more than 110
million light years and it is thought to
be over 7 thousand times as massive as
the local group
enough to exert a considerable influence
on its intergalactic neighborhood
but the cluster network doesn't end here
either
a groundbreaking study in 2014
published by scientists at the
university of hawaii
revealed that the virgo supercluster is
just one component of an even
greater network of almost unknowable
intricacy and scale
our home galactic supercluster laniakea
[Music]
the lanikia supercluster extends over
half a billion light years across
space and is home to more than a hundred
thousand
galaxies it is so vast
that for a long time we didn't realize
that its constituent superclusters were
connected
laniakia consists of four main galaxy
superclusters
us and the rest of the virgo
supercluster the hydra centaurus
supercluster
the parvo indus supercluster and the
southern supercluster
and despite their enormous cosmic
distances from each other
they interlink to create a plethora of
flows across space
because the lanikia supercluster is so
large
it is not dense enough to be
gravitationally bound
and so as the universe expands instead
of coming together and condensing
further
it should instead get caught up in the
hubble flow dispersing the supercluster
but that's not what we are observing in
practice
or at least not all of what we're
observing
in addition to the universe's expansion
elongating the structure
the entirety of the supercluster appears
to be being attracted to whatever is in
this
area the question is
what could possibly be there that is
powerful enough to unite
galactic superstructures of this size
flows of galaxies aren't uncommon within
galaxy wolves
but this is more than just the flow
there is a gravitational anomaly here
with enormous power
which is anchoring the entire cluster
together and making it move
like a sinkhole to a half a billion
light-year basin
this anomaly is what we mean when we say
the great attractor
the great attractor is the somewhat
ominous name given to the gravitational
focal point
of the lanikia supercluster thought to
lie somewhere around
250 million light years away from the
milky way
and it is attracting the contents of the
cluster towards it
everything for hundreds of millions of
light years is attracted to
and flowing towards this one region
which means one of two things
either there is an unusually high
concentration of mass there
like an ultramassive or dense galaxy
cluster
or perhaps something stranger like a
monstrous
intergalactic black hole or a mysterious
dark force which is counteracting the
universe's expansion
in reality it is likely to be the
product of a dense galaxy
supercluster so massive that it is
influencing the entirety of the virgo
supercluster
as well as the other clusters around it
but whatever it is
there is one fundamental issue we can't
see it
in addition to the nature of the source
itself one of the main things that makes
the greater tractor mystery so
intriguing
yet infuriating is its location
it lies in an area of the sky which is
blocked out by the milky way's galactic
plane from the point of view of the
earth
because of where the solar system lies
in relation to the milky way's galactic
plane
its bright illuminated core and dark
dusty clouds extinguish the light
reaching the galaxy from behind blocking
out approximately one-fifth of our field
of view
this area is known as the zone of
avoidance
where the galaxy's features make it
virtually impossible to see or detect
anything within or beyond it
there's nothing different about the
space behind the zone of avoidance
it is just our position relative to the
galactic core this is the problem
[Music]
in fact in about 100 million years or so
the sun will have orbited the galaxy's
central black hole
taking us to the other side of the milky
way where the backdrop of the zone of
avoidance will be revealed
but that's going to take a very very
long time and so for all intents and
purposes
we are stuck on this side and it just so
happens that the largest gravitational
anomaly in the local universe
which is dragging us and everything
around us towards it
happens to lie behind this obstructed
region
ironic right it certainly makes for a
genuinely interesting and somewhat
unnerving mystery in astronomy
which troubled scientists for around 40
years
the first signs of the greater tractor
were detected in the 1970s when we
realized that the milky way galaxy is
moving through space
back then there was no way to see or
detect anything behind the zone of
avoidance
they didn't have the sophisticated
technology that we have at our disposal
today
and so around 40 degrees of the sky
remained unmapped and unknowable
however as scientists began producing
the first detailed maps of the cosmic
microwave background
that is the primordial microwave
radiation left over from the big bang
which permeates all of space
they discovered what is known as the cmb
dipole
a gradient in the temperature of the sky
from one side to the other
scientists quickly realized that this
disparity is the result of the milky way
moving through space
and the motion in the direction of the
red area compresses the oncoming waves
of radiation
ever so slightly causing that direction
to appear slightly warmer
as we know galaxy's moving through space
is not that unusual
as all galaxies are moving apart largely
in accordance with the hubble flow
but things can affect this flow namely
gravity
and the gravity of objects around a
galaxy
the discrepancy between a galaxy's
actual movement through space
due to gravity when compared with what
one would expect in an expanding
universe is known as its peculiar
velocity
in layman's terms the speed at which a
galaxy moves through
space because of something other than
the universe's expansion
when we tried to measure our peculiar
velocity by tracking the sun relative to
the cmb
we discovered that we are moving towards
the constellation of centaurus at a
speed of about 600 kilometers per second
and this isn't by chance either
something in that area is attracting us
but wherever we were headed it was
situated behind the zone of avoidance
and so the cause of this peculiar
velocity remained a topic of fierce
debate and speculation for many years
initial hypotheses were that they were
just simply more galaxies
in the direction of the zone of
avoidance which we just couldn't see
the milky way's outlying position to the
much denser virgo cluster was also
attributed as a possible cause
however while the virgo cluster could
attract us with its gravity
it is not nearly massive enough to
explain the speed at which we are moving
something considerably more massive was
to blame
and then the mystery got even bigger
quite literally
as redshift surveys began mapping the
universe in 3d
during the 1980s we realized that not
only are we moving towards this
gravitational anomaly in centaurus
but so are the galaxies both above and
below the zone of avoidance
the power of the source was much greater
than once thought
in 1986 it was estimated that the source
of this anomaly lies between 150 million
and 220 million light years away
and two years later an international
team of researchers
led by donald lyndon bell proposed that
the observed motions of 400 elliptical
galaxies
were best fitted by a large bulk flow of
galaxies towards a so-called great
attractor lurking behind the zone of
avoidance
and thus the term was coined
while we didn't know what was causing
the great attractor in order to explain
our peculiar velocity
as well as the motions of so many
galaxies around us
the source of the great attractor was
predicted to be around 10 quintillion
times the mass of the sun
that's 10 million billion suns
equivalent to many thousands of massive
galaxies
and so naturally astronomers were keen
to establish exactly what was lurking in
the dark
[Music]
back when it was first noted our search
for the greater tractor was severely
hindered by the zone of avoidance
but times have changed and technology
has vastly improved
for one thing we're not simply limited
to observing visible light anymore
while the milky way's plane might be
opaque to light that we can see
radio and infrared emissions from galaxy
superclusters outside of the milky way
are capable of penetrating the galaxy's
clouds
even if only slightly this gives us some
idea of what could lie beyond
the avoidance zone albeit a very limited
picture
instead the best means we have of seeing
behind the zone of avoidance
is through x-rays x-rays are another
kind of electromagnetic radiation
like visible light radio and infrared
like the latter x-rays can also pass
through the opaque galactic plane
and are emitted by galaxy superclusters
in addition there are far fewer x-ray
emitting sources in space than there are
sources of infrared and radio waves
making supercluster x-ray emitters
easier to identify
in 1996 using data from the rosat
microwave mission
a team of researchers led by south
african astrophysicist renee krohn
cortez
discovered evidence for a galaxy
supercluster within the zone of
avoidance that had previously evaded
detection
now thought to be a key galactic
concentration at the heart of the great
attractor
while the cluster had been undetectable
through visible light within an
area spanning just two degrees of the
sky by plotting the x-ray sources
identified by rosat onto the area
a significant galaxy cluster is revealed
in the backdrop
known as arbul 3627 also known as the
norma cluster
the norma cluster lies around 220
million light years away from the earth
and is thought to be very close to the
proposed heart of the greater tractor
and it is thought to have a mass in the
region of one quadrillion times that of
our sun
and so we realized that the great
attractor was probably a supercluster
with
arbol 3627 near its core
[Music]
however even at the time the team knew
that the norma cluster probably didn't
account for the full picture
while it is massive it didn't seem
massive enough to account for the
peculiar velocity of the milky way
something else must be at work but
unfortunately we were still limited in
what we could observe due to the
obscured zone
and so the mystery remained inconclusive
heading into the new millennium
while many scientists agree that the
great attractor
is the result of a dense galaxy
concentration
i should take this opportunity to
mention that it is by no means the only
theory
there were those who refuted the idea of
a galaxy supercluster being responsible
due to the incomparable scale of its
influence when compared with other
cosmic structures
in fact because the universe's expansion
is thought to be powered and accelerated
by a phenomenon known as dark energy
there are those who suggest that only
something equally as
dark would be sufficient to overcome it
dark in the sense that it is unknown and
beyond our realm of understanding
this brings us onto a branch of
alternate explanations for the great
attractor
the idea that instead of a galaxy
supercluster attracting us
a mysterious undiscovered force is
responsible for the bulk flows of
galaxies that we see
in lanikia like enormous jet stream air
currents in the vacuum of space
this idea is called dark flow and it is
defined as a non-random component
of the universe's expansion which
deviates from the hubble flow
causing galaxies to stream towards a
single point
like the greater tractor rather than
receding away from one another as one
might expect
if this is the case and there is
something darker at play than we yet
realize
then perhaps we might be able to see
evidence of a gigantic flow mechanism by
searching for something
at the opposite end of the great
attractor a great repeller
if you would while that might sound a
bit outlandish
in 2017 we did see something just like
this
the dipole repeller just as all galaxies
in the lanikia supercluster
are flowing towards the great attractor
they all seem to be flowing away from an
area on the opposite end of the
supercluster
a region which appears to be pushing its
galaxies outwards and setting them on
their galactic paths towards the greater
tractor
perhaps the greater tractor and the
dipole repeller are part of some dark
cosmic system
capable of overcoming the effects of the
universe's expansion
however while the dipole repeller may
seem anomalous and indicative of
something more spooky
dark flow certainly doesn't need to
exist to explain it
in fact the dipole repeller probably
isn't even an anomaly
but rather a natural byproduct of galaxy
cluster formation
as the compound process of galaxies
gathering and attracting more galaxies
creates denser galaxy clusters
this process in turn empties out the
space around the cluster
creating voids between clumps of
galaxies
the more populous and massive the galaxy
cluster the more voids will form around
it
as areas are raided for their galaxies
to feed the structure
and so while it may seem like galaxies
are being pushed away from the dipole
repeller
in reality nothing is pushing them only
the pulling force of gravity
and the dipole repeller is merely just
an area which has had its galaxies
emptied out by massive
influences which holds the appearance of
a so-called virtual repeller
so then if there is no dark force at
work to produce these flows
then what is causing us to move so fast
if not the clusters in the region of the
greater tractor
in the early 2000s a study called the
clusters in the zone of avoidance
project
or caesar selected x-ray signatures
recorded by the rosat mission for
follow-up and investigation
with newer more effective x-ray
technology
the aim of the project was to map this
final portion of the sky
in the zone of avoidance that remained
uncharted for so many years
and also to focus in on what makes the
region of the great attractor so
great in doing so
they identified over 200 previously
undiscovered galaxy clusters in galactic
no-man's land
including in the proposed region of the
great attractor
however these clusters were found to be
significantly less massive than what was
once predicted to account for our
peculiar velocity
only a tenth of the proposed mass in
fact
in reality the great attractor is not
nearly as great as we once thought
while it is the focal point of the
lanikia supercluster which is dragging
us towards it
it is not the only thing influencing us
instead the caesar survey revealed a
substantial concentration of galaxies
much further beyond the greater tractor
near the shapley supercluster
the shapley supercluster is one of the
most studied of its kind
with its 25 constituent galaxy clusters
marked here in
blue it is situated around 650 million
light years away from the milky way
and while it was discovered in the 1930s
by harlow shapley
it didn't become a topic of interest
until the late 90s and the advent of
better technology
but from 1997 until 2001
no less than 40 scientific papers were
published on the cluster
and in 2005 caesar discovered a
concentrated region of galaxies in the
vicinity of the shapley supercluster
nicknamed the shapley attractor
an even greater a more massive galactic
over density than the great attractor
lying around half a billion light years
away
in total shapley is home to more than 8
000 galaxies
and has a mass equivalent to about 10
000 times that of the milky way
four times greater than the mass
observed in the region of the greater
tractor by the same project
and so it is now believed that this
supercluster is contributing the lion's
share of influence responsible for the
milky way's peculiar velocity
while everything in our supercluster is
flowing towards the greater tractor
the greater tractor itself is being
pulled towards the shapley supercluster
yes the reason that the milky way is
being pulled so quickly
towards centaurus is due to the fact
that it is not just the greater tractor
attracting us
in that direction our peculiar velocity
is likely the result of a compound
effect with the greater tractor
responsible for about 44
of the motion being closer to us and the
remaining 56 percent of our velocity
owes to the much more massive and remote
shapley supercluster
which is dragging the greater tractor
and thus the galaxies in our
supercluster
along with it and so it was
with this crucial piece of the puzzle
that astronomers at hawaii university
were able to redefine the boundaries of
our local supercluster
using the great attractor and the
effects of the more remote shapley
attractor
to map our galactic colony and define
the lanikia supercluster
but there was one more piece of the
mystery which we had yet to discover
when the shapley attractor was
identified astronomers speculated that
there may be another
even more remote galaxy supercluster
which is also contributing to our
perceived movement across space
and only five years ago did renee cron
cortez and her team
the same team that discovered the norma
cluster some 20 years prior
finally solved the mystery that they had
been studying for many decades
in 2016 kron courtferg and her team
announced the discovery of a new
supercluster in the zone of avoidance
region
even further beyond than the shapley
supercluster
using data from the anglo-australian
telescope and the southern african large
telescope
they identified a region of over-density
consistent with a galactic supercluster
around 800 million light years away
this galaxy cluster termed the velar
supercluster
is the final piece of the puzzle thought
to contribute at least
50 kilometers a second to our peculiar
velocity
with the influence of the norma cluster
the shapley attractor and a little help
from the velar supercluster
the observed effects of the great
attractor that were noticed all those
years ago
can finally be explained
[Music]
so with all these things considered what
will be the outcome for us
will we be pulled into the center of the
greater tractor
will the rest of the lenny kia
supercluster will it destroy
our galaxy in the process
well the answer is almost certainly no
while we are being lugged in the
direction of these superclusters against
the expansion of the universe
the force that drives the hubble flow is
accelerating
we will never reach the shapley
supercluster or even the greater tractor
for that matter
as before long dark energy will have
inflated the universe so aggressively
that the influences of the great and
shapley attractors will no longer be
able to overcome it
though we are moving towards centaurus
right now the only thing we are headed
for is a collision with andromeda
and anything else which remains in the
local group
our only eventual destination is the
void
the great attractor like all galaxy
clusters and groups
will be dispersed into its constituent
galaxies
each being cast into its own section of
space thanks to the force that drives
the universe's inflation
but hey right now the separation of
galaxies hasn't occurred yet
and it's going to be a pretty long time
before it does
and we are fortunate enough to exist at
a time when we can observe brilliant
cosmic structures like leniencia
without them vanishing over the cosmic
horizon there's just something about
galaxies flowing like great lakes across
space
that seems tantalizing and beautiful and
it is remarkable just how far
gravity propagates and though the great
attractor was a gravitational mystery
for many years the biggest unsolved
mystery
is gravity itself
[Music]
you